%{(Post "The Hypotenuse of a Recurrence Triangle" "March 2023")}%

This is my solution to an interesting problem which appeared in the entrance exam of a prominent high school in Iran. I acquired this through a friend that participated in that exam.

-----

Let the recurrence triangle be a triangle of numbers that is generated like a recurrence relation. The first two rows are given, and the rest are generated via a given recurrence rule. In particular, we are interested in a recurrence triangle where the first two rows are the Fibonacci numbers, and the rest are generated by the pair-wise sum of the two rows above it. We call this triangle the Fibonacci triangle.
<center>
<table style='padding: 10px'>
<tr>
    <td style='width:30px'>0</td> <td style='width:30px'>1</td> <td style='width:30px'>1</td> <td style='width:30px'>2</td> <td style='width:30px'>3</td> <td style='width:30px'>5</td> <td style='width:30px'>8</td> <td style='width:30px'>...</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td> </td> <td>0</td> <td>1</td> <td>1</td> <td>2</td> <td>3</td> <td>5</td> <td>...</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td> </td> <td> </td> <td>2</td> <td>3</td> <td>5</td> <td>8</td> <td>13</td> <td>...</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td>4</td> <td>7</td> <td>11</td> <td>18</td> <td>...</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td>12</td> <td>19</td> <td>31</td> <td>...</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td>30</td> <td>49</td> <td>...</td>
</tr>
<tr>
    <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td> </td> <td>80</td> <td>...</td>
</tr>
<caption style='caption-side:bottom'>The Fibonacci recurrence triangle</caption>
</table>
</center>
Before we can start exploring the interesting properties of this triangle, we have to introduce some notation for dealing with it. So let $\binom{x}{y}$ be the number at the $x$th row and $y$th column.

The first thing that one notices when looking at this triangle is that the rows also happen to be recurrence relations; and not just the first two! For example, $\binom{6}{3} + \binom{7}{3} = \binom{8}{3}$!  This fact can be shown in its general form via induction.

**Theorem 1.** The rows of the Fibonacci recurrence triangle are three-term linear recurrence relations. More specifically, $\binom{m}{n} = \binom{m}{n-1} + \binom{m}{n-2}$.

*Proof.* This should be evident for the first two rows, which are Fibonacci sequences. So we may assume as our inductive hypothesis that this property holds up to row $m$ of the triangle. In row $m+1$, we have $\binom{m+1}{n} = \binom{m}{n} + \binom{m-1}{n}$, $\binom{m+1}{n-1} = \binom{m}{n-1} + \binom{m-1}{n-1}$, and $\binom{m+1}{n-2} = \binom{m}{n-2} + \binom{m-1}{n-2}$. By using our inductive hypothesis we can see that:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\binom{m+1}{n} &= \binom{m}{n} + \binom{m-1}{n} \\\\
&= \binom{m}{n-1}+\binom{m}{n-2}+\binom{m-1}{n-1}+\binom{m-1}{n-2} \\\\
&= \binom{m}{n-1}+\binom{m-1}{n-1}+\binom{m}{n-2}+\binom{m-1}{n-2} \\\\
&= \binom{m+1}{n-1} + \binom{m+1}{n-2}
\end{aligned}
$$
Which is what we wanted to show.

Some astute readers might now be puzzled by our use of a triangle as opposed to a rectangle. If each row is the pairwise sum of the two rows above it, then why don't we apply this rule to the first few columns? The reason we don't is that the Fibonacci rectangle is actually symmetric with respect to its diagonal. So we have no use of accounting for the whole rectangle.

**Theorem 2.** The Fibonacci rectangle, as defined above, is symmetric with respect to the diagonal. This fact may stated more precisely as $\binom{a}{b} = \binom{b}{a}$.

*Proof.* This fact should be clear for the first few rows of our rectangle, since the first row and the first column are both the Fibonacci sequence. So we may assume that this property holds up to row $m$ of the rectangle. From the definition of the Fibonacci rectangle we know that $\binom{m+1}{n} = \binom{m}{n} + \binom{m-1}{n}$.  By our inductive hypothesis, it should be clear that $\binom{m+1}{n} = \binom{n}{m} + \binom{n}{m-1}$, which by theorem 1, is equal to $\binom{n}{m+1}$. Therefore, $\binom{m+1}{n} = \binom{n}{m+1}$. So we are done.

An interesting problem involving this triangle is the nature of its hypotenuse. We know how the rows and columns are generated, but we don't yet know anything about the hypotenuse. The numbers of the hypotenuse form a sequence which is given by $\{\binom{m}{m}\}_{m>0}$. 

**Theorem 3.** The hypotenuse of the Fibonacci triangle is a recurrence relation of 4 terms generating via the following rule for all $k > 0$:
$$ \binom{k}{k} = 2\left [ \binom{k-1}{k-1} + \binom{k-2}{k-2} \right ] - \binom{k-3}{k-3}.$$

*Proof.* By the theorem 1,  $\binom{k}{k} = \binom{k}{k-1} + \binom{k}{k-2}$ which is in turn equal to $\binom{k-1}{k-1} + \binom{k-2}{k-1} + \binom{k-1}{k-2} + \binom{k-2}{k-2}$.   Since $\binom{k-2}{k-1} = \binom{k-1}{k-1} - \binom{k-3}{k-1}$, and $\binom{k-1}{k-2} = \binom{k-2}{k-2} + \binom{k-3}{k-2}$, then $\binom{k}{k} = 2\left [ \binom{k-1}{k-1} + \binom{k-2}{k-2} \right ] + \binom{k-3}{k-2} - \binom{k-3}{k-1}$. And as $\binom{k-3}{k-1} = \binom{k-3}{k-2} + \binom{k-3}{k-3}$, we can see that:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\binom{k}{k} &= 2\left [ \binom{k-1}{k-1} + \binom{k-2}{k-2} \right ] + \binom{k-3}{k-2} - \binom{k-3}{k-1}, \\\\
&= 2\left [ \binom{k-1}{k-1} + \binom{k-2}{k-2} \right ] - \binom{k-3}{k-3}.
\end{aligned}
$$
Which is what we intended to show.
